the autobiography
of benjamin franklin introduction
this is a librivox recording all
librivox recordings are in the public
domain
for more information or to volunteer
please visit
librivox
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
edited by frank woodworth
pine introduction we americans devour
eagerly
any piece of writing that purports to
tell us the secret of success in life
yet how often we are disappointed to
find nothing but commonplace statements
or recipes that we know by heart but
never follow
most of the life stories of our famous
and successful men
fail to inspire us because they lack the
human element that makes the story
record
real and brings the story within our
grasp
while we are searching far and near for
some aladdin's lamp
to give coveted fortune there is
ready at our hand if we will only reach
out and take it
like the charm in milton's comas unknown
and like esteemed and dull swain
treads on it daily with his clouted
shoen the interesting human
and vividly told story of one of the
wisest and most useful lives in our
history
and perhaps in any history in franklin's
autobiography is offered not so much a
ready-made formula for success
as the companionship of a real
flesh-and-blood man
of extraordinary mind and quality whose
daily walk and conversation
will help us to meet our own
difficulties
much as does the example of a wise and
strong
friend while we are fascinated by the
story
we absorb the human experience through
which
a strong and helpful character is
building
the thing that makes franklin's
autobiography different from every other
life story of a great
and successful man is just this human
aspect of the account
franklin told the story of his life as
he himself says
for the benefit of his posterity he
wanted to help them
by the relation of his own rise from
obscurity
and poverty to eminence and wealth he is
not
unmindful of the importance of his
public services
and their recognition yet his accounts
of these achievements
are given only as a part of the story
and the vanity displayed is
incidental and in keeping with the
honesty of the recital
there is nothing of the impossible in
the method and practice of franklin
as he sets them forth the youth who
reads the fascinating story
is astonished to find that franklin in
his early years
struggled with the same everyday
passions and difficulties
that he himself experiences and he loses
the sense of discouragement that comes
from a realization of his own
shortcomings and
inability to attain there are other
reasons why the
autobiography should be an intimate
friend of american young people
here they may establish a close
relationship with one of the foremost
americans
as well as one of the wisest men of his
age
the life of benjamin franklin is of
importance to every american
primarily because of the part he played
in securing the independence of the
united states
and is establishing it as a nation
franklin shares with washington the
honors of the revolution
and the events leading to the birth of
the new nation
while washington was the animating
spirit of the struggle in the colonies
franklin was its ableist champion abroad
to franklin's cogent reasoning and keen
satire
we owe the clear and forcible
presentation
of the american case in england and
france
while to his personality and diplomacy
as well as
his fossil pen we are indebted for the
foreign alliance
and the funds without which washington's
work must have failed
his patience fortitude and practical
wisdom
coupled with self-sacrificing devotion
to the cause of his country
are hardly less noticeable than similar
qualities
displayed by washington in fact franklin
as a public man
was much like washington especially in
the
entire disinterestedness of his public
service
franklin is also interesting to us
because by his life and teachings
he has done more than any other american
to advance
the material prosperity of his
countrymen it is said that his widely
and faithfully read maxims
made philadelphia and pennsylvania
wealthy
while poor richard's pithy sayings
translated into many languages
have had a worldwide influence franklin
is a good type of our
american manhood although not the
wealthiest
or the most powerful he is undoubtedly
in the versatility of his genius and
achievements
the greatest of our self-made men the
simple yet graphic story in the
autobiography
of his steady rise from humble boyhood
in a tallow chandler shop
by industry economy and perseverance in
self-improvement
to eminence is the most remarkable of
all the remarkable histories
of our self-made men it is in itself a
wonderful illustration
of the results possible to be attained
in a land of unequaled opportunity
by following franklin's maxims
franklin's fame however
was not confined to his own country
although he lived in a century notable
for the rapid evolution of scientific
and political thought and activity
yet no less a keen judge and critic than
lord jeffrey
the famous editor of the edinboro review
a century ago
said that in one point of view the name
of franklin must be considered as
standing higher
than any of the others which illustrated
the 18th century
distinguished as a statesman he was
equally great as a philosopher
thus uniting in himself a rare degree of
excellence
in both these pursuits to excel in
either of which
is deemed the highest praise franklin
has indeed been aptly called
many-sided he was eminent in science and
public service
in diplomacy and in literature he was
the edison of his day
turning his scientific discoveries to
the benefit of his fellow men
he perceived the identity of lightning
and electricity
and set up the lightning rod he invented
the franklin stove
still widely used and refused to patent
it
he possessed a masterly shrewdness in
business
and practical affairs carlisle called
him the father of all the yankees
he founded a fire company assisted in
founding a hospital
and improved the cleaning and lighting
of streets he developed
journalism established the american
philosophical society
the public library in philadelphia and
the university of pennsylvania
he organized a postal system for the
colonies which was the basis of the
present united states post office
bancroft the eminent historian called
him
the greatest diplomat of his century
he perfected the albany plan of union
for the colonies
he is the only statesman who signed the
declaration of independence
the treaty of alliance with france the
treaty of peace with england
and the constitution as a writer
he has produced in his autobiography and
in poor richard's almanac two works
that are not surpassed by similar
writing
he received honorary degrees from
harvard and yale from oxford and saint
andrews
and was made a fellow of the royal
society which awarded him the copley
gold medal
for improving natural knowledge he was
one of the eight foreign associates
of the french academy of science the
careful study of the autobiography is
also valuable because of the style in
which it is written
if robert louis stevenson is right in
believing that his remarkable style was
acquired by
imitation then the youth who would gain
the power to express
his ideas clearly forcibly and
interestingly
cannot do better than to study
franklin's method franklin's fame in the
scientific world
was due almost as much to his modest
simple
and sincere manner of presenting his
discoveries
and to the precision and clearness of
the style in which he described his
experiments
as to the results he was able to
announce
sir david humphrey the celebrated
english chemist
himself an excellent literary critic as
well
as a great scientist said a singular
felicity guided all franklin's
researchers and by
very small means he established very
grand
truths the style and manner of his
publication on
electricity are almost as worthy of
admiration
as the doctrine it contains franklin's
place in literature is hard to determine
because he was not primarily a literary
man his aim in his writings
as in his life work was to be helpful to
his fellow men
for him writing was never an end in
itself
but always means to an end yet his
success
as a scientist a statesman and a
diplomat
as well as socially was in no little
part due to his ability as a writer
his letters charmed all and made his
correspondence
eagerly sought his political arguments
were the joy of his party
and the dread of his opponents his
scientific discoveries
were explained in language at once so
simple
and so clear that plowboy and exquisite
could follow his thought or his
experiment to its conclusion
as far as american literature is
concerned franklin has no
contemporaries before the autobiography
only one literary work of importance had
been produced in this country
cotton mathers magnalia a church history
of new england
in a ponderous stiff style franklin was
the first american author
to gain wide and permanent reputation in
europe the autobiography
poor richard father abraham's speech or
the way to wealth as well as some of the
bagatelles
are as widely known abroad as any
american writings
franklin must also be classed as the
first american humorist
english literature of the 18th century
was characterized
by the development of prose periodical
literature reached its perfection early
in the century in
the tattler and the spectator of addison
and steele
pamphlet tears flourished throughout the
period the homeless pros of bunyan and
defoe
gradually gave place to the more elegant
and artificial language
of samuel johnson who set the standard
for prose writing
from 1745 onward this century saw the
beginnings
of the modern novel in fielding's tom
jones
richardson's clarissa harlow stearns
tristan shanti
and goldsmith's vicar of wakefield
gibbon wrote the decline and fall of the
roman empire
hume his history of england and adam
smith
the wealth of nations in the simplicity
and vigor of his style
franklin moore nearly resembles the
earlier group of writers
in his first essay he was not an
inferior imitator of addison
in his numerous parables moral
allegories
and apologies he showed bunyan's
influence
but franklin was essentially a
journalist in his swift
terse style he is most like dafoe
who was the first great english
journalist and master of the newspaper
narrative
the style of both writers is marked by
homely
vigorous expression satire burlesque
repartee here the comparison must end
defoe and his contemporaries were
authors their vocation was writing
and their success rests on the
imaginative
or creative powers they displayed to
authorship
franklin laid no claim he wrote no work
of the imagination
he developed only incidentally a style
in many respects as remarkable
as that of his english contemporaries he
wrote the best autobiography in
existence
one of the most widely known collections
of maxims and an
unsurpassed series of political and
social satires
because he was a man of unusual scope of
power and usefulness
who knew how to tell his fellow men the
secrets
of that power and usefulness the story
of the autobiography
the account of how franklin's
autobiography came to be written
and the adventures of the original
manuscript forms in itself an
interesting story
the autobiography is franklin's longest
work and yet it is only a fragment
the first part written as a letter to
his son william franklin
was not intended for publication and the
composition is more informal
and the narrative more personal than in
the second part
from 1730 on which was written with a
view to publication
the entire manuscript shows little
evidence of revision
in fact the expression is so homely and
natural
that his grandson william temple
franklin
in editing the work changed some of the
phrases
because he thought them inelegant and
vulgar
franklin began the story of his life
while on a visit to his friend
bishop shipley at twyford in hampshire
southern england in 1771. he took the
manuscript
completed to 1731 with him when he
returned to philadelphia
in 1775. it was left there with his
other papers when he went to france
in the following year and disappeared
during the confusion
incident to the revolution 23 pages of
closely written manuscript
fell into the hands of abel james an old
friend who sent a copy to franklin
at pasay near paris urging him to
complete the story
franklin took up the work at passe in
and carried the narrative forward a few
months he changed the plan
to meet his new purpose of writing to
benefit the younger reader
his work was soon interrupted and was
not resumed until 1788
when he was at home in philadelphia he
was now
old infirm and suffering and was still
engaged in public service
under these discouraging conditions the
work progressed
slowly it finally stopped when the
narrative reached the year 1757
copies of the manuscript were sent to
friends of franklin in
england and france among others to
mature le vlad
at paris the first edition of the
autobiography was published in french
at paris in 1791 it was clumsily and
carelessly translated
and was imperfect and unfinished where
the translator got the manuscript
is not known level yeah disclaimed any
knowledge of the publication
from this faulty french edition many
others were printed
some in germany two in england and
another in france so great was the
demand for the work
in the meantime the original manuscript
of the autobiography
had started on a varied and adventurous
career
it was left by franklin with his other
works to his grandson
william temple franklin whom franklin
designated as his literary executioner
when temple franklin came to publish his
grandfather's works
in 1817 he sent the original manuscript
of the autobiography
to the daughter of levio in exchange for
her father's copy
probably thinking the clearer transcript
would make
better printers copy the original
manuscript thus found its way
to the level family and connections
where it remained
until sold in 1867 to mr john
bigelow united states minister to france
by him it was later sold to mr e dwight
church
of new york and passed with the rest of
mr church's library
into the possession of mr henry e
huntington the original manuscript of
franklin's autobiography
now rests in the vault in mr
huntington's residence
at 5th avenue and 57th street new york
city
when mr bigelow came to examine his
purchase he was astonished to find
what people had been reading for years
as the authentic
life of benjamin franklin by himself was
only a garbled and incomplete version of
the real
autobiography temple franklin had taken
unwarranted liberties
with the original mr bigelow says he
found more than 1200
changes in the text in 1868
therefore mr bigelow published the
standard edition
of franklin's autobiography it corrected
errors in the previous editions
and was the first english edition to
contain the short
fourth part comprising the last few
pages of the manuscript
written during the last year of
franklin's life mr bigelow republished
the autobiography
with additional interesting matter in
three volumes
in 1875 in 1905
and in 1910 the text in this volume is
that of mr bigelow's additions
for the divisions into chapters and the
chapter titles however
the present editor is responsible
the autobiography has been reprinted in
the united states many scores of times
and translated into all the languages of
europe it has never lost its popularity
and is still
in constant demand at circulating
libraries
the reason for this popularity is not
far to seek
for in this work franklin told in a
remarkable manner
the story of a remarkable life he
displayed hard common sense and a
practical knowledge of the art of living
he selected and arranged his material
perhaps unconsciously
with an unerring instinct of the
journalist for the best effects
his success is not a little due to his
plain clear
vigorous english he used short sentences
and words
homely expressions apt illustrations and
pointed
allusions franklin had a most
interesting varied and unusual life
he was one of the greatest
conversationalists of his time
his book is the record of that unusual
life
told in franklin's own unexcelled
conversational style
it is said that the best parts of
boswell's famous biography of samuel
johnson
are those parts where boswell permits
to tell his own story in the
autobiography
a no less remarkable man and talker than
samuel johnson
is telling his own story throughout
fwp the gilman country school
baltimore september 1916.
end of introduction
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
chapter one this is a librivox recording
all librivox recordings are in the
public domain
for more information or to volunteer
please visit librivox.org
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
edited by frank woodward payne
chapter one ancestry and
early youth in boston twyford
at the bishop of saint aas 1771.
begin footnote twyford is a small
village
not far from winchester in hampshire
southern england
there was the county seat of the bishop
of saint
assif dr jonathan shipley the good
bishop
as dr franklin used to style him
their relations were intimate and
confidential
in his pulpit and in the house of lords
as well as in society
the bishop always opposed the harsh
measures of the crown
towards the colonies end footnote
dear son i have ever had pleasure in
obtaining any little anecdotes
of my ancestors you may remember the
inquiries i made among the remains of my
relations when you were with me in
england
and the journey i undertook for that
purpose imagining it may be equally
agreeable to you to know the
circumstances of my life many of which
you are yet unacquainted with and
expecting the enjoyment of a week's
uninterrupted leisure in my present
country retirement
i sit down to write them to you for
which i have
besides some other inducements having
emerged from the poverty and obscurity
in which i was born
and bred to a state of affluence and
some degree of reputation
in the world and having gone so far
through life with a considerable share
of felicity
the conducting means i made use of
which with the blessing of god so well
succeeded
my posterity may like to know as
they may find some of them suitable for
their own situations
and therefore fit to be imitated that
felicity
when i reflect on it has induced me
sometimes to say
that where it offered to my choice
i would have no objection to a
repetition of the same life
from its beginning only asking the
advantages
authors have in second edition to
correct some faults of the first
so i might besides correcting the faults
change some
sinister accidents and events of it
for others more favorable but though
this were denied i should still accept
the offer
since such a reputation is not to be
expected the next
thing most like living one's life over
again
seems to be a recollection of that life
and to make that recollection as durable
as possible
by putting it down in writing hereby too
i shall indulge the inclination so
natural in old men
to be talking of themselves and their
own past actions
and i shall indulge it without being
tiresome to others
who through respect to age might
conceive themselves
obliged to give me a hearing since this
may be read
or not as anyone pleases and lastly
i may as well confess it since my denial
of it will be believed by nobody
perhaps i shall a good deal gratify my
own
vanity begin footnote in this connection
woodrow wilson says
and yet the surprising and delightful
thing about this book is
that take it all in all it has not the
low tone of conceit
but is a staunch man's sober and
unaffected
assessment of himself and the
circumstances of his career
gibbon and hume the great british
historians who were contemporaries of
franklin
express in their autobiographies the
same feeling about the propriety
of just self-praise and
footnote indeed i scarce
ever heard or saw the introductory words
without vanity i may say etc
with some vain thing immediately
following most people dislike vanity and
others
whatever share they have of it
themselves but i give it
fair quarter whenever i meet with it
being persuaded
that it is often productive to the good
possessor
and to others that are within his sphere
of action
and therefore in many cases it would not
be altogether absurd
if a man were to thank god for his
vanity among the other comforts of life
and now i speak of thanking god i desire
with all humility to acknowledge that i
owe
the mentioned happiness of my past life
to his kind providence
which led me to the means i used and
gave them success
my belief of this induces me to hope
though i must not presume
that the same goodness will still be
exercised
toward me in continuing that happiness
or enabling me to bear a fatal
reverse which i may experience as others
have done
the complexion of my future fortune
being known to him
only in whose power it is to bless
to us even our afflictions the notes
one of my uncles who had the same kind
of curiosity
in collecting family anecdotes once put
into my hands
furnished me with several particulars
relating to our ancestors
from these notes i learned that the
family had lived in the same village
ecten in northamptonshire for 300 years
and how much longer he knew not
perhaps from the time when the name of
franklin that
before was the name of an order of
people
begin footnote a small landowner
and a footnote was assumed by then
as a surname when others took surnames
all over the kingdom on a freehold of
about 30 acres aided by the smith's
business
which had continued in the family till
his time the eldest
son being always bred to that business a
custom which he and my father followed
as to their eldest sons when i searched
the registers
at ecton i found an account of their
births
marriages and burials from the year 1555
only and there being no registers kept
in that parish
at any time preceding by that register i
perceived that i was the youngest
son of the youngest son for five
generations back
my grandfather thomas who was born in
lived in ecton until he grew too old to
follow business longer
when he went to live with his son john a
dyer
at branbury in oxfordshire and whom my
father
served as an apprentice there my
grandfather died and lies buried
we saw his gravestone in 1758
his eldest son thomas lived in the house
at
ecton and left it with the land to his
only child
a daughter who with her husband one
fisher of wellingborough sold it
to mr istid now lord of the manner there
my grandfather had four sons that grew
up these
thomas john benjamin and josiah i will
give you
what account i can of them at this
distance from my papers
and if these are not lost in my absence
you will among them find many more
particulars
thomas was bred a smith under his father
but being
ingenious and encouraged in learning as
all my brothers were
by an esquire palmer then the principal
gentleman in that parish
he qualified himself for the business of
scrivener became a considerable man in
the county
was a chief mover of all public-spirited
undertakings
for the county or town of northampton
and his own village of which many
instances are related of him
and which taken notice of and patronized
by the then lord halifax he died in 1702
january 6th old style just four years to
the day before
i was born begin footnote january 17th
new style this change in the calendar
was made in 1582
by pope gregory the 13th and adopted in
england
in 1752. every year whose number in the
common
reckoning since christ is not divisible
by
four as well as every year whose number
is divisible by 100
but not by four shall have 365 days
and all other years shall have 366 days
in the 18th century there was a
difference of 11 days between the old
and new style of reckoning
which the english parliament canceled by
making the 3rd of september
1752 the 14th
the julian calendar or old style is
still retained in russia and greece
whose dates consequently are now 13 days
behind those of other christian
countries
and footnote the account we received of
his life and character
from some old people at ekton i remember
struck you as something extraordinary
from its
similarity to what you knew of mine had
he died on the same day you said
one might have supposed a transmigration
john was bred a dyer i believe of
woolens
benjamin was bred a silk dyer serving an
apprenticeship at london
he was an ingenious man i remember him
well
for when i was a boy he came over to my
father in boston
and lived in the house with us some
years
he lived to a great age his grandson
samuel franklin now lives in boston he
left behind him two quattro volumes
manuscripts of his own poetry consisting
of
little occasional pieces addressed to
his friends and relations
of which the following sent me is a
specimen he had formed a shorthand of
his own
which he taught me but never practiced i
have now forgot it
i was named after this uncle there being
a particular affection between him and
my father
he was very pious a great attendee
of sermons of the best preachers which
he took down in his shorthand
and had with him many volumes of them he
was also much of a politician
too much perhaps for his station there
fell lately into my hands in london
a collection he made of all the
principal pamphlets relating to public
affairs
from 1641 to 1717.
many of the volumes are wanting as
appears by the numbering
but there still remain eight volumes in
folio and 24 in cuatro
and in octavo a dealer in old books met
with them
and knowing me by my sometimes buying of
him
he brought them to me it seems my uncle
must have left them
here when he went to america which was
about 50 years since
there are many of his notes in the
margins
the obscure family of ours was early in
the reformation
and continued protestants through the
reign of queen mary
when they were sometimes in danger of
trouble on account of their zeal against
potpourri they had got an english bible
and to conceal and secure it it was
fastened open with tapes
under and within the cover of a joint
stool
when my great great grandfather read it
to his family
he turned up the joint stool upon his
knees
turning over the leaves then under the
tapes
one of the children stood at the door to
give notice if he saw
the apparatus coming who was an officer
of the spiritual court
in that case the stool was turned down
again upon its feet
when the bible remained concealed under
it as before
this anecdote i had from my uncle
benjamin the family
continued all of the church of england
till about the end of charles ii's reign
when some of the ministers had been
outed for non-conformity
holding convecticles in north hampshire
benjamin and joshua adhered to them
and so continued all their lives the
rest of the family remained
with the episcopal church convecticles
were secret gatherings of dissenters
from the established
church joshua my father married young
and carried his wife and three children
into england
about 1682 the convecticals having been
forbidden by law
and frequently disturbed induced some
considerable men of his acquaintance
to remove to that country and he was
prevailed with them to accompany them
thither where they expected to enjoy
their mode of religion with freedom
by the same wife he had four children
more born
there and by a second wife ten more
in all seventeen of which i remember 13
sitting at one time
at his table who all grew up to be men
and women
and married i was the youngest son and
the youngest child but two
and was born in boston new england
my mother the second wife was abbath
folger daughter of peter folger one of
the first settlers of new england
of whom honorable mention is made by
cotton mather
in his church history of that country
entitled
magnalia christi americana as
a godly learned englishman if i remember
the words
rightly i have heard that he wrote
sundry small occasional pieces
but only one of them was printed which i
saw now many years since it was written
in 1675
in the homespun verse of that time and
people
and addressed to those then concerned in
the government there
it was in favor of liberty of conscience
and in behalf
of the baptists quakers and other
sectaries
that had been under persecution
ascribing the indian wars
and other distresses that had befallen
the country to
that persecution as so many judgments of
god to punish
sohinis and offense and exhorting a
repeal of those uncharitable laws
the whole appeared to me as written with
a good deal of decent
plainness and manly freedom the six
concluding lines i remember
though i have forgotten the two first of
the stanza
but the purport of them was that his
censures proceeded from goodwill and
therefore
he would be known to be the author
because to be
a libeler says he i hate it with my
heart
from sherburne town where now i dwell
my name i do put here without offense
your real friend it is peter folger
franklin was born on sunday january 6th
old style
1706 in a house on milk street
opposite the old south meeting house
where he was baptized on the day of his
birth
during a snowstorm the house where he
was born
was burned in 1810 cotton mather
1663-1728 clergyman
author and scholar pastor of the north
church boston
he took an active part in the
persecution of witchcraft
my elder brothers were all apprentices
to different trades
i was put to the grammar school at eight
years of age
my father intending to devote me as the
tithe
of his sons to the service of the church
my early readiness and learning to read
which must have been very early as i do
not remember
when i could not read and the opinion of
all his friends
that i should certainly make a good
scholar encouraged him in this purpose
of his my uncle benjamin too approved of
it
and proposed to give me all his
shorthand volumes of sermons i suppose a
stock
to be set up with if i would learn his
character i continued however at the
grammar school
not quite one year though in that time i
had risen gradually
from the middle of the class of that
year to be the head of it
and farther was removed to the next
class above it
in order to go with that into the third
at the end of the year but my father in
the meantime
from a view of the expense of a college
education
which having so large a family he could
not well afford
and the mean living many so educated
were afterwards able to obtain reasons
that he gave to his friends in my
hearing
alters his first intention took me from
the grammar school and sent me to a
school for writing an arithmetic
kept by a then famous man mr george
browell very successful in his
profession generally
and by mild encouraging methods under
him i acquired
fair writing pretty soon but i failed in
the arithmetic
and made no progress in it at 10 years
old i was taken home to assist my father
in his business
which was that of a tallow chandler and
soap boiler
a business he had not bred to but had
assumed on his arrival in new england
and on finding his dying trade
would not maintain his family being in
little request
accordingly i was employed in cutting
wick for the candles
filling the dipping mold and the molds
for cast candles
attending the shop going of errands etc
i disliked the trade and had a strong
inclination for the sea
but my father declared against it
however
living near the water i was much in and
about it
learned early to swim well and to manage
boats
and when in a boat or canoe with other
boys
i was commonly allowed to govern
especially in any case of difficulty
and upon other occasions i was generally
a leader among the boys
and sometimes led them into scrapes of
which i will mention one instance
as it shows an early projecting public
spirit
though not then justly conducted
there was a salt marsh that bounded part
of the mill pond
on the edge of which at high water we
used to stand
to fish for minnows by much tramping we
had made it a mere quagmire
my proposal was to build a wharf there
fit for us to stand upon
and i showed my comrades a large heap of
stones
which were intended for a new house near
the marsh and which would
very well suit our purpose accordingly
in the evening when the workmen
were gone i assembled a number of my
play fellows
and working with them diligently like so
many emmett's
sometimes two or three to a stone
we brought them all away and built our
little wharf
the next morning the workmen were
surprised at missing the stones
which were found in our wharf inquiry
was made after the removers
we were discovered and complained of
several of us
were corrected by our fathers and though
i pleaded the usefulness of the work
mine convinced me that nothing was
useful which was not
honest i think you may like to know
something of his personal character
he had an excellent constitutional body
was of middle stature
but well set and very strong he was
ingenious
could draw prettily was skilled a little
in music
and had a clear pleasing voice so that
when he played psalm tunes on his violin
and sung with all as he sometimes did
in an evening after the business of the
day was over
it was extremely agreeable to hear he
had a mechanical genius too
and on occasion was very handy in the
use of other tradesmen's tools
but his great excellence lay in a sound
understanding
and solid judgment in prudent matters
both in private and public affairs in
the latter indeed
he was never employed the numerous
family he had to educate
and the straightness of his
circumstances kept him close to
his trade but i remember well his being
frequently
visited by leading people who consulted
him for his opinion in affairs
of the town or of the church he belonged
to
and showed a good deal of respect for
his judgment and advice
he was also much consulted by private
persons about their affairs
when any difficulty occurred and
frequently chosen
an arbiter between contending parties at
his table he liked to have
as often as he could some sensible
friend or neighbor
to converse with and always took care to
start some ingenious
or useful topic for discourse which
might tend to improve the minds of his
children
by this means he turned our attention to
what was good
just and prudent in the conduct of life
and little or no notice was ever taken
of what related to the victuals on the
table whether it was well
or ill-dressed in or out of season of
good or bad flavor
preferable or inferior to this or that
other thing of the kind
so that was how i was brought up in such
a perfect inattention to those matters
as to be quite indifferent what kind of
food was set before me
and so unobservant of it that to this
day
if i am asked i can scarce tell a few
hours after dinner
what i dined upon this has been a
convenience
to me in traveling where my companions
have
been sometimes very unhappy for want of
a suitable gratification
of their more delicate because better
instructed
tastes and appetites my mother
had likewise an excellent constitution
she suckled all her 10 children
i never knew whether my father or mother
to have
any sickness but that of which they died
he had 89 and she had 85 years of age
they lie buried together at boston i
some years since
placed a marble over their grave with
this inscription
josiah franklin and abbath his wife
lie here in turn they lived lovingly
together in wedlock
55 years without an estate or any
gainful
employment by constant labor and
industry
with god's blessing they maintained a
large family comfortably and brought up
13 children and seven
grandchildren reputably from this
instance reader be encouraged to
diligence in thy calling
and distrust not providence he was a
pious and prudent man she
a discreet and virtuous woman their
youngest son
in fightful regard to their memory
places this stone
jf born 1655 died
1744 at 89.
af born 1667 died 1752
85. this marble having decayed
the citizens of boston in 1827 erected
in its place
a granite obelisk 21 feet high
bearing the original inscription quoted
in the text
and another explaining the erection of
the monument
by my rambling digressions i perceive
myself to be grown old
i used to write more methodically but
one does not dress for private company
as for a public ball his perhaps
only negligence to return i continued
thus employed in my father's business
for two years
that is till i was 12 years old and my
brother john
who was bred to that business having
left my father
married and set up for himself at rhode
island
there was all appearance that i was
destined
to supply his place and become a tallow
chandler
but my dislike to the trade continuing
my father was under apprehensions
that if he did not find one for me more
agreeable
i should break away and go to sea as his
son joshua had done
to his great vexation he therefore
sometimes took me to walk with him
and see joiners bricklayers turners
brazers etc at their work that he might
observe my inclination and endeavor
to fix it on some trade or other on land
it has ever since been a pleasure to me
to see
good workmen handle their tools and it
has been useful to me
having learnt so much by it as to be
able to do little jobs myself in my
house
when a workman could not readily be god
and to construct little machines for my
experiments
while the intention of making the
experiment was fresh and warm in my mind
my father at last fixed upon the
cutler's trade
and my uncle benjamin's son samuel who
was bred to that business
in london being about that time
established in boston
i was sent to be with him sometime on
liking
but his expectations of a fee with me
displeased my father
i was taken home again end of chapter
one
the autobiography